---
jupyter:
  jupytext:
    formats: ipynb,md
    text_representation:
      extension: .md
      format_name: markdown
      format_version: '1.3'
      jupytext_version: 1.13.0
  kernelspec:
    display_name: Python 3
    language: python
    name: python3
---

# IPython and Shell Commands


When working interactively with the standard Python interpreter, one of the frustrations is the need to switch between multiple windows to access Python tools and system command-line tools.
IPython bridges this gap, and gives you a syntax for executing shell commands directly from within the IPython terminal.
The magic happens with the exclamation point: anything appearing after ``!`` on a line will be executed not by the Python kernel, but by the system command-line.

The following assumes you're on a Unix-like system, such as Linux or Mac OSX.
Some of the examples that follow will fail on Windows, which uses a different type of shell by default, though if you use the *Windows Subsystem for Linux* the examples here should run correctly.
If you're unfamiliar with shell commands, I'd suggest reviewing the [Shell Tutorial](http://swcarpentry.github.io/shell-novice/) put together by the always excellent Software Carpentry Foundation.

<!-- #region -->
## Quick Introduction to the Shell

A full intro to using the shell/terminal/command-line is well beyond the scope of this chapter, but for the uninitiated we will offer a quick introduction here.
The shell is a way to interact textually with your computer.
Ever since the mid 1980s, when Microsoft and Apple introduced the first versions of their now ubiquitous graphical operating systems, most computer users have interacted with their operating system through familiar clicking of menus and drag-and-drop movements.
But operating systems existed long before these graphical user interfaces, and were primarily controlled through sequences of text input: at the prompt, the user would type a command, and the computer would do what the user told it to.
Those early prompt systems are the precursors of the shells and terminals that most data scientists still use today.

Someone unfamiliar with the shell might ask why you would bother with this, when many results can be accomplished by simply clicking on icons and menus.
A shell user might reply with another question: why hunt icons and click menus when you can accomplish things much more easily by typing?
While it might sound like a typical tech preference impasse, when moving beyond basic tasks it quickly becomes clear that the shell offers much more control of advanced tasks, though admittedly the learning curve can be intimidating.

As an example, here is a sample of a Linux/OSX shell session where a user explores, creates, and modifies directories and files on their system (``osx:~ $`` is the prompt, and everything after the ``$`` sign is the typed command; text that is preceded by a ``#`` is meant just as description, rather than something you would actually type in):

```bash
osx:~ $ echo "hello world"             # echo is like Python's print function
hello world

osx:~ $ pwd                            # pwd = print working directory
/home/jake                             # this is the "path" that we're sitting in

osx:~ $ ls                             # ls = list working directory contents
notebooks  projects 

osx:~ $ cd projects/                   # cd = change directory

osx:projects $ pwd
/home/jake/projects

osx:projects $ ls
datasci_book   mpld3   myproject.txt

osx:projects $ mkdir myproject          # mkdir = make new directory

osx:projects $ cd myproject/

osx:myproject $ mv ../myproject.txt ./  # mv = move file. Here we're moving the
                                        # file myproject.txt from one directory
                                        # up (../) to the current directory (./)
osx:myproject $ ls
myproject.txt
```

Notice that all of this is just a compact way to do familiar operations (navigating a directory structure, creating a directory, moving a file, etc.) by typing commands rather than clicking icons and menus.
With just a few commands (``pwd``, ``ls``, ``cd``, ``mkdir``, and ``cp``) you can do many of the most common file operations.
It's when you go beyond these basics that the shell approach becomes really powerful.
<!-- #endregion -->

## Shell Commands in IPython

Any standard shell command can be used directly in IPython by prefixing it with the ``!`` character.
For example, the ``ls``, ``pwd``, and ``echo`` commands can be run as follows:

```ipython
In [1]: !ls
myproject.txt

In [2]: !pwd
/home/jake/projects/myproject

In [3]: !echo "printing from the shell"
printing from the shell
```


## Passing Values to and from the Shell

Shell commands can not only be called from IPython, but can also be made to interact with the IPython namespace.
For example, you can save the output of any shell command to a Python list using the assignment operator:

```ipython
In [4]: contents = !ls

In [5]: print(contents)
['myproject.txt']

In [6]: directory = !pwd

In [7]: print(directory)
['/Users/jakevdp/notebooks/tmp/myproject']
```

These results are not returned as lists, but as a special shell return type defined in IPython:

```ipython
In [8]: type(directory)
IPython.utils.text.SList
```

This looks and acts a lot like a Python list, but has additional functionality, such as
the ``grep`` and ``fields`` methods and the ``s``, ``n``, and ``p`` properties that allow you to search, filter, and display the results in convenient ways.
For more information on these, you can use IPython's built-in help features.


Communication in the other direction–passing Python variables into the shell–is possible using the ``{varname}`` syntax:

```ipython
In [9]: message = "hello from Python"

In [10]: !echo {message}
hello from Python
```

The curly braces contain the variable name, which is replaced by the variable's contents in the shell command.


# Shell-Related Magic Commands

If you play with IPython's shell commands for a while, you might notice that you cannot use ``!cd`` to navigate the filesystem:

```ipython
In [11]: !pwd
/home/jake/projects/myproject

In [12]: !cd ..

In [13]: !pwd
/home/jake/projects/myproject
```

The reason is that shell commands in the notebook are executed in a temporary subshell that does not maintain state from command to command.
If you'd like to change the working directory in a more enduring way, you can use the ``%cd`` magic command:

```ipython
In [14]: %cd ..
/home/jake/projects
```

In fact, by default you can even use this without the ``%`` sign:

```ipython
In [15]: cd myproject
/home/jake/projects/myproject
```

This is known as an ``automagic`` function, and the ability to execute such commands without an explicit `%` can be toggled with the ``%automagic`` magic function.

Besides ``%cd``, other available shell-like magic functions are ``%cat``, ``%cp``, ``%env``, ``%ls``, ``%man``, ``%mkdir``, ``%more``, ``%mv``, ``%pwd``, ``%rm``, and ``%rmdir``, any of which can be used without the ``%`` sign if ``automagic`` is on.
This makes it so that you can almost treat the IPython prompt as if it's a normal shell:

```ipython
In [16]: mkdir tmp

In [17]: ls
myproject.txt  tmp/

In [18]: cp myproject.txt tmp/

In [19]: ls tmp
myproject.txt

In [20]: rm -r tmp
```

This access to the shell from within the same terminal window as your Python session lets you more naturally combine Python and the shell in your workflows with fewer context switches.
